# nin-validator: Norwegian national identity numbers

This is a validator/parser for norwegian national identity numbers, written in Typescript.

Basic usage is very simple:

```typescript
import validateNin from "@digitalarkivet/nin-validator"
// The default export accepts birth numbers and D-numbers
if(!validateNin(someNin)) {
    throw "Invalid NIN"
}
```

To extract more information, use `parseNin`. Then, you have the option to specify which number types to accept. The export `ALL_NIN_TYPES` include rarely-used types like H-numbers and FH-numbers, while `DEFAULT_NIN_TYPES` include birth number and D number. You can also mix-and-match by using `NinNumberType` directly.

```typescript
import {parseNin, ALL_NIN_TYPES, DEFAULT_NIN_TYPES, NinNumberType} from "@digitalarkivet/nin-validator"

const {info, error} = parseNin(someNin)
// Is the same as
const {info, error} = parseNin(someNin, ...DEFAULT_NIN_TYPES)
// Or, to can accept all types (very rarely what you want)@
const {info, error} = parseNin(someNin, ...ALL_NIN_TYPES)
// Or, to accept specific types
const {info, error} = parseNin(someNin, NinNumberType.BirthNumber, NinNumberType.HNumber)
```

The `info` key will hold `undefined` on error.
On success, it contains `gender`, `dateOfBirth`, `numberType`, and `isTestNumber`.

The `error` key will contain a `NinValidationError` on error, and hold `undefined` on success.


### The NinInfo type

#### Gender
The `Gender` enum uses the ISO/IEC 5218 codes:
 - 0 = Not known;
 - 1 = Male;
 - 2 = Female;
 - 9 = Not applicable.

`parseNin` will return `Not known` for FH-numbers, and in the future for "new" national identification numbers that do not carry gender information.

#### Date of birth
A JS date, midnight on the date of birth, in local time.
Contains `undefined` for FH numbers.

#### Number type
One of the `NinNumberType` values. This is a Typescript enum, backed by a string.

#### Test numbers
This flag is set to true if the number originates from ["Tenor"](https://www.skatteetaten.no/skjema/testdata/), the test utility of the norwegian tax authority.

Since Arkivverket has no reason to exclude test numbers from production use (they will not occur in real archives, and if they do, we want to display them), test numbers can not be rejected when validating a nin.

### The NinValidationError type

A `NinValidationError` is one of a predefined set of error codes, saying which check failed.

- `FORMAT` means the input string is not 11 digits.
- `CHECKSUM` means the checksum validation failed
- `DATE` means the date does not exist (leap year?), or the century code did not match the individual part of the nin.
- `INVALID_TYPE` means the nin is valid, but the type is not one of the allowed types passed to `parseNin()`

## About the test data

The test data for birth numbers, D numbers and H-numbers is synthetically generated.

The test data for "tenor test numbers" is generated by Tenor.